[MUSIC]
If you read articles in
the scientific literature,
you'll often see people report P-values
when they report statistical tests.
P-values are widely used, and it's
important to understand what they mean.
They're also widely criticized, because
people often misinterpret p-values.
So in this lecture, the goal is
to understand what they mean and
how to correctly interpret them.
When we talk about p-values, the first
question we should ask ourselves is
why are they so
popular in scientific articles?
Well, there's a reason for this, and
Benjamini expresses it quite nicely.
He says in some sense it offers
a first line of defense against
being fooled by randomness,
separating the signal from the noise.
So, this is what the p-values
allow you to do.
When you interpret your data,
you might be very likely to interpret data
in favor of the hypothesis that you have,
even when the effect might be only
slightly in the right direction.
The risk is that you're fooling yourself.
You might be too likely to declare
that something is going on,
when you're actually looking
at random variation in data.
So, p-values are one way to
prevent you from fooling yourself.
P-values tell you how surprising the data
is, assuming that there is no effect.
And we'll look at all these
aspects in more detail.
What surprising means,
why they're statements about the data, and
why they're built on the idea
that there is no effect.
Now, some people say
that p-values are more
accurately explained as what you use if
you don't know Bayesian statistics yet.
In Bayesian statistics,
people don't use p-values.
And I still remember when I
was doing my own PhD, that I
had this confusion about whether I should
use p-values, or Bayesian statistics.
My understanding was, more or less,
that I realized there was some problem
with using p-values, and Bayesian
statistics might be preferable, but
most people didn't use
Bayesian statistics.
So, it was probably fine to
just continue using p-values.
Now, I think it's fine to use p-values,
but you should interpret them correctly.
So, that's the goal in this lecture,
to prevent this confusion in you,
and to make sure that you use p-values
correctly, if you decide to use them.
Let's start with a practical example.
Let's say you want to to do a study where
you examine the influence of calling
while you are driving.
Does being on the phone when you
are in your car increase the risk of
getting into an accident?
You might design a study where half of
the participants drive around the city
while they're on the phone, and the other
half of the participants drive around, but
they're not on the phone.
You want to see if there's a difference,
maybe in the number of people they hit
while they're driving through the street.
Or maybe your ethical committee
doesn't allow you to do this,
and you're better off using
a driving simulator to study this.
Now, if you have collected your data, you
counted how many people get hit by a car,
either by people who are on
the phone while they're driving or
people who are not on the phone,
then you can look at the difference
between these two conditions.
Now, this difference
is never exactly zero.
There's always some number follow after
the comma that makes a difference.
So, let's say the difference you
observe is 0.11, a mean difference.
Now, how should you interpret
this mean difference?
There are two options.
A, what you are looking at is
probably just random noise.
There's always some random
noise in your data.
Option B, this is probably a real
difference, this is something that
you should take seriously, and at least
examine further in future studies.
So, which of these two is true.
Well, we can use the p-value to
differentiate between these two options.
From the data that we have, we can
calculate means, standard deviations, and
we know the sample size that we have.
We can use these parameters to
calculate a test statistic, and
compare this test statistic
against a distribution.
You can use many different
types of distributions.
If you examine precognition, you might
want to use a paranormal distribution.
But most often,
people just use the normal distribution.
So, this bell shaped graph is
something you might have seen before.
And there's something you
should note here, and
that's that this distribution
is centered on zero.
And when we talk about the p-value
being data that is surprising,
assuming the null is true, the null
hypothesis is true, this is what we mean.
We look at a distribution
centered at zero.
Now, you can see that most of
the data in this case, let's look
at 95% of the data,
will fall between two critical values.
And these critical values, you might
have seen this number, 1.96 and -1.96.
These are critical values if you
want to use an alpha level of 0.05.
If data falls between these two values,
it's not surprising.
Assuming that the null hypothesis is true,
most of the data will fall between
these two critical values.
But sometimes, we might see a data
point that's more extreme than this.
And this is a surprising find.
This is surprising data whenever the mean
difference, or the test statistic that is
computed from this mean difference, is in
one of the two tails of this distribution.
So, whenever we find that data that
falls in these tails, it's surprising.
And we might want to examine it further.
It also means that the p-value's
smaller than 0.05.
The formal definition of a p-value is
the probability of getting the observed,
or more extreme data,
assuming the null hypothesis is true.
Now, I highlighted the word data here.
I think it's important to realize that
we're talking about the probability of
observing data.
A p-value is the probability
that you'll observe some data,
but not the probability of a theory.
This is a very common misunderstanding.
People often want to make a statement
about the probability that
the theory is true.
But when you calculate a p-value,
all you can do is make a statement
about the probability of the data.
Now, if you make this mistake,
you're in good company.
Let's take a look at this example from
quantum physics, where a physicist talks
about the probability of observing
a certain spin between quantum particles.
So, this is a study where they
measured the spin in a particle levels
floating around somewhere in Delft,
and another one that was floating
around somewhere in Amsterdam,
in the Netherlands, and
these two particles spin together,
they have some sort of relationship.
And this relationship, based on the data,
was statistically significant
with a p-value of 0.04.
Now, some physicist is interviewed
about this finding, and this physicist
concludes, in other words, there is
a 96% probability they won the race.
So, this person is making a mistake
here because, with won the race,
this person means there's a 96%
probability that this theory is correct.
But this is a statement about a theory.
It's not a statement about
the data that you have observed.
So it's comforting, maybe,
that a quantum physicist,
which sounds like you're
supposed to be really smart,
also makes this misinterpretation
of what a p-value means.
After you have observed a p-value
that's smaller than 0.05,
for example,
an effect is not 95% likely to be true.
Think about pre-cognition research.
Let's say that I present
one study to you where you
find a statistically significant
effect of pre-cognition.
After this, do you really think it's now
95% probable that pre-cognition exists?
Probably not,
you cannot get the probability
that the null hypothesis is true,
given the data from a p-value.
If you look at the two statements below on
the screen, you see that the probability
of the data, or more extreme data,
assuming the null hypothesis is true.
It's not the same as
the probability of an hypothesis
given some data that you have observed.
This two probabilities can differ widely.
If you want to know the probability
that the theory is true,
you need to use Bayesian statistics.
Bayesian statistics is the only
approach that will allow you to make
statements about the probability
that the theory is true.
What happens if you do a study and
your p-value is larger than 0.05?
Well first of course, you spend a lot of
time and effort collecting this data, and
maybe you hope to find
the statistically significant effect.
So the first thing you do is cry a little,
you're a little bit depressed.
That's okay, But after this how
should you interpret this data?
Well, all that we know when
the p-value is larger than
0.05 is that the data we have observed
is not surprising, that's all.
It doesn't mean that
there is no true effect.
There might very well be in effect but
you just didn't have enough participants
in your study to detect this effect.
Remember that you need large samples
to statistically detect a small effect.
So just because your
p-value is larger than 0.05
doesn't allow you to conclude
that there is no effect.
There might be very small effect,
you don't know.
Personally, I try to think of
a p-value larger than 0.05 as mu,
which is a concept from Zen Buddhism.
In Zen Buddhism, there is a famous
saying that goes like this.
A monk asked a Chinese Zen master,
does a dog have a Buddha-nature or not?
So you might expect a yes or
no answer here because that's also how
the question is phrased yes or no.
But instead the Zen master answered mu,
which basically means I'm on
asking the question it's negating
the question that's asked.
Whenever you find a p-value
that's larger than 0.05,
you might feel the tendency to say so
is there an effect or not?
But whenever the p-value is larger than
0.05, you can't answer this question.
So you should just answer mu.
So how do you use p-values correctly?
The first thing to understand
is that p-values can be use
as a rule to guide
behavior in the long run.
You can calculate them for every single
study, but they only work in the long run.
Let's take a look how.
If you use the decision rule whenever the
p-value is smaller than the alpha level,
so this is your type one error rate,
which is often set to 0.05,
you can act as if the data is not noise.
Now this word act is very important.
It's independent of what you believe is
true, but all that you know is, if you use
this decision rule in the long run,
you won't say that there is something,
when there is nothing,
more than 5% of the time.
Alternatively, when the p-value is larger
than the alpha you can remain uncertain or
act as if the data is just noise.
So these are rules that you
follow in the long run.
When you act as if there is an effect
whenever the p-value is smaller than 0.05,
in the long run you won't be
wrong more than 5% of the time.
Now this is an interpretation of p-values
as proposed by name and it's often used.
Let's take the discovery of
the Higgs boson as an example.
If you're a remember, during the press
conference about the Higgs boson,
researchers were talking about whether
the 5 sigma threshold was passed.
And 5 sigma is used as a threshold to
declare something a discovery in physics.
Now 5 sigma is basically
a p-value smaller than 0.0000003.
So based on this idea,
we can act as if the Higgs boson is true.
Every now and
then of course we'll be wrong with
such a high threshold for an error.
We'll only be wrong in one of many
billions of parallel universes.
So there's one parallel universe
where people spend the time and
effort to build a large Hadron Collider
to detect the Higgs boson and
they declared it was
a statistically significance.
So it was they were actually wrong but
with such a high threshold this
of course rarely happens and
we can be pretty safe that there is a
Higgs boson and we didn't make a mistake.
When you interpret p-values and
you want to write something about what you
found you should not write, we found a
p-value smaller than 0.05, so our theory.
Because if you do this, you're
making a statement about this theory
based on a p-value and
you shouldn't do this.
The correct way to discuss a p-value
smaller than 0.05 is to say we
found the p-value smaller than 0.05,
so our data.
You make a statement about the data
because that's what the p-value
relates to.
You might say something like, so
our data is in line with some
idea that you want to test.
Whenever you found a known significant
result, a p-value larger than 0.05.
You enter what's known as
a degenerative research line.
You made a prediction but
it doesn't hold up.
So you have something to explain.
Now one explanation might
just be random variation.
P-values vary and even if you have
examined a true effect, every now and
then you'll observe
a non-significant result.
So you might just say,
everything's fine, this happens.
If I do another study that's exactly the
same, you'll see that it will pan out and
my prediction will hold.
Other times, you might need to say,
well the effect that I predicted
might be smaller than I expected.
So you do another study,
but it's larger and
then you show that
the effect is really there.
Nevertheless, whenever you
find a non-significant result,
there is something to think about.
You have to explain it in some way.
One way might be, if you do a lot of
studies, every now and then you will find
a non significant result, but then you
need a lot of studies to support this.
Other times you might say, I have to do
the study in a slightly different way, and
you can use this change in the paradigm
to develop a progressive research line.
Remember that p-values vary so
always think meta-analytically
about p-values.
This is also recommended by the
statisticians who talked about p-values in
the very beginning.
For example,
this is a quote by Neyman and Pearson.
Statistical tests should
be used with discretion and
understanding, and not as instruments
which themselves give the final verdict.
So if you fail a statistical
test that's only one thing
that should go into your reasoning to
decide whether this is a true effect.
Always think more about your study.
P-value might be a starting points, but
you also want to look at effect sizes and
other studies that have been done.
Fisher similarly says
that a single p-value was
not enough to declare some discovery on.
He says, a phenomenon is experimentally
demonstrable when we know how
to conduct an experiment which
will rarely fail to give
us a statistically significant result.
So we have to repeat
the experiment multiple times.
He also says, no isolated experiment,
however significant in itself,
can suffice for the experimental
demonstration of any natural phenomenon.
So he's saying that we
should see a single p-value,
maybe as an invitation to
explore this effect further, but
it can never be enough to declare
something a scientific fact.
So we always need to
do several studies and
p-values can guide us in the long run
in which studies we might want to do.
So, at the end of this lecture,
let's take a look at the p-values that you
can expect when there is a true effect.
And the p-values that you might
expect when there is no true effect.
Now, I never really realized how
p-values are distributed across studies
when you do a lot of them.
And I think it's very important
to understand this for
the correct interpretation of a p-value.
So take a moment to think about this.
What kind of p-values would you
expect when there is a true effect?
expect when there is no effect?
Let's take a look what really happens.
When there is a true effect,
the p-value distribution depends
on the statistical power.
Let's take a look at
the visualization of this.
In this graph, you see the p-values for
100,000 studies,
where every study had
50% statistical power.
This means that it's 50% probable
that we'll observe a p-value
that's smaller than 0.05.
If we look at the p-value distribution,
we indeed see that it's much more likely
to observe small p-values,
than it is to observe high p-values.
And if we look at the leftmost bar,
we see that indeed 50,000 of the 100,000
simulated studies yield a p-value
that falls between 0 and 0.05.
Now, we might want to increase
the statistical power a little bit.
You see that with higher power
we have basically pushed more of
the p-values below the significance
threshold of 0.05.
Here we have 80,000 of the 100,000
simulated studies that
yield a significant effect.
If we increase the statistical
power even more, to 95%,
we now see that most of
the p-values that we'll observe,
given that there is a true effect,
will fall below the significance level.
So which p-values can you
expect when there is no effect?
I really never knew this myself.
I thought that p-values might
be distributed in a way that,
if there's no effect,
we'll see a lot of very high p-values.
Or I thought that it's possible
that maybe they're distributed
as sort of a normal distribution,
but instead it turns out,
that when there is no effect,
p-values are uniformly distributed.
Every p-value is equally likely.
And it also makes a lot of
sense if you understand it.
In this case, we have simulated 100,000
studies where there is no true effect.
And you see that, no matter where
you look in the distribution,
low p-values or high p-values,
they're all equally likely.
Now this makes sense because in this way,
when there is a uniform distribution
it means that 5% of the p-values that
we observe when there is no effect,
fall below the 0.05 threshold.
So when there's no effect, we have a 5%
probability of making a type one error of
saying there is a significant effect
when there's actually nothing going on.
So here you can see this small type
one error rate highlighted in red.
So this is what it means
to make a type one error.
The reason that it's 5% is because
there's a uniform p-value distribution.
If you would increase your
alpha level to 0.10 there's
still 10% of the p-values
that fall below 0.10.
To conclude, it's important to understand
how to correctly interpret the p-value.
Its use is often criticized because people
incorrectly interpret what p-values mean.
And I hope that after this lecture,
you won't be one of them.
[MUSIC]